For the final project, I plan on recreating the MENACE, or Matchbox Educable Noughts and Crosses Engine, in Haskell. Noughts and Crosses, or Tic Tac Toe as Americans call it, is a pretty simple and solved game and one that can be trained to a set of matchboxes. Each matchbox resembles one boardstate (including symmetry), and each turn you are at the boardstate, you pick a random match that will tell you which moves to go. If you were to win with that move, it is rewarded by adding more matches of that move into that matchbox; if you were to lose with that move, it is punished by removing that match from the matchbox.
For the easy milestones of this project, I think it would be the barebone structure of the program: board representation, MENACE matchbox system (i.e. a way to hold the information of the matchboxes and the matches it holds in each matchbox), learning updates (i.e. moves that reflect the matchboxes in real time), and simulation by playing itself to train. For the medium milestones, I think implementing a human vs MENACE mode, an ability to show bead counts or move weights, and being able to save/load learned state is apt. Lastly, something that I can try implementing but isn't completely needed and is more QoL is symmetry reduction, statistics/graphs, nicer UI, and configurable learning rules (reward/punishment numbers).
I need to look up possible data structures to use for my matchboxes or see if I need to implement one myself. The program will probably be a TUI as Haskell GUI is very limited. I need to look for ways to do array rotations/symmetry, perhaps I could hardcode operations worst case scenario. Through this project, I hope to explore how a reinforcement learning system can be implemented in a purely functional setting.
Inspiration I've got for this project is from Matt Parker's (or 'standupmaths' on YouTube) video on 'MENACE: the pile of matchboxes which can learn' made 8 years ago (source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R9c-_neaxeU). I have attempted the project 8 years ago when I first saw this video, but I was inept at programming back then, and I struggled with the implementation. I thought this project would be a great opportunity to try again.